Real-Time Microchip Segmentation and Usable Surface Area Quantification
========================================================================
Project Report

1. ABSTRACT
-----------
The lab workflow for preparing silicon microchips for cell-seeding experiments
currently requires manually transferring each chip into a dish, imaging at 1x
zoom, exporting a TIFF, setting scale, tracing the chip boundary, and reading
out the seedable surface area through legacy software. Each chip takes one to
two minutes and a typical 36-chip experiment burns through hours of cleaning,
imaging, and quantification. This project develops a deep-learning pipeline
that produces the same area readout automatically from a single image. A
U-Net (a fully-convolutional encoder-decoder network for image segmentation)
is trained on hand-drawn binary masks to segment the chip region in the
image, a saturation-based refinement step strips off the chip's shadow on
the background paper, and a calibration factor converts pixel area to square
millimeters (mm^2). Evaluated chip-level (the model never sees the
validation chips during training), the U-Net reaches a mean Dice coefficient
of 0.9420 and a mean intersection over union (IoU) of 0.8906 on the held-
out chips, and the end-to-end predicted seedable area across all 24 chips
matches the ground-truth area to a mean absolute error (MAE) of 3.37 mm^2
with a coefficient of determination R^2 = 0.642.

2. BACKGROUND
-------------
Each chip is a small (roughly 5 to 30 mm^2) silicon piece used as a substrate
for seeding cells. Before seeding, the lab needs to know how much usable
surface the chip presents. Defects on the chip surface (dust, debris,
scratches, edge damage) are not usable, so the seedable area is less than
the total chip area. Today this is measured by hand in a tracing program.
The legacy workflow does not scale and introduces operator-dependent
variation between chips and between sessions.

The project plan was to replace the manual tracing with a two-stage U-Net:
stage 1 finds the chip in the image, stage 2 splits the chip into seedable
versus unseedable regions. The trained model would be deployed on a
Raspberry Pi 4 with a USB capture device for live inference at the
microscope.

3. DATASET
----------
The training dataset (Training_dataset_2) has 24 chips (C01-C24) imaged at
zoom 1 against 7 different background paper colors each. That is 168 PNG
images at 720x576. For each chip the seedable surface area in mm^2 was
recorded as part of the original lab workflow; these 24 values live in
filenames such as c01_z1_17.37 (chip 1 at zoom 1 has 17.37 mm^2 seedable
surface). Multiple background colors were chosen on purpose so the model
would not overfit to a single paper color, and the chip orientations vary
across backgrounds for the same reason.

A separate testing dataset (Testing_dataset_1) has 12 chips with 2 to 9
images per chip but no ground-truth masks or area values. Those chips are
different physical chips imaged on a different date. They are useful for
qualitative inspection (does the model still produce reasonable masks on
chips it has never seen and on lighting it has never seen?) but cannot be
used for quantitative validation.

Ground-truth segmentation masks were not part of the original dataset. To
train a U-Net I drew binary masks by hand in ImageJ for the seedable area
of each chip in the training set:

  - chips C01 to C06: four background variants each (24 masks)
  - chips C07 to C24: one background each (18 masks)

Total: 42 manual masks. One mask (C01 background 3) was empty due to a
save issue and is filtered out automatically, leaving 41 valid pairs. Each
mask was drawn by tracing the clean chip surface with the polygon
selection tool, then converted to a binary image with Edit > Selection >
Create Mask and saved as JPEG or TIFF in
Training_dataset_2_ground_truth_masks.

4. METHOD
---------
4.1 Network
The U-Net is the standard four-down four-up architecture with skip
connections and a base channel count of 16, which gives about 1.94 million
parameters. The smaller base count keeps inference fast enough for a
Raspberry Pi 4 deployment. The input is resized to 288x384 (close to the
native aspect ratio and divisible by 16 for clean downsampling) and the
output is a single-channel logits map. A sigmoid is applied at inference
and thresholded at 0.5 to get the predicted chip mask, which is then
resized back to the native 720x576 for area measurement.

4.2 Training and validation split
The combined loss is binary cross-entropy (BCE) plus soft Dice. Optimizer
is Adam at learning rate 1e-3 with ReduceLROnPlateau on validation Dice.
Augmentation is
intentionally heavy because the labeled dataset is small: horizontal and
vertical flip, affine transforms (translate, scale, rotate up to 20
degrees), random brightness and contrast, and Gaussian noise.

The split is chip-level: chips C07, C12, C18, and C20 are held out
entirely as validation. No mask of any of those four chips is ever seen
during training. They were chosen to span the area range (5.49, 10.22,
18.68, 28.43 mm^2 respectively). Training ran for 40 epochs and reached a
best validation Dice of 0.9436 mid-training.

A random per-mask split was tried first but rejected because it allowed
two backgrounds of the same chip to land on opposite sides of the split,
which inflates the validation metric. The chip-level split tests true
generalization to unseen chips, not to unseen backgrounds of seen chips.

4.3 Stage 2 (shadow refinement)
Stage 2 cleans up the U-Net's chip mask. The dominant failure mode of the
raw U-Net mask is that the chip's shadow on the background paper gets
pulled into the predicted mask: the shadow is darker than the surrounding
paper, so it looks chip-like to a model trained on chip-vs-background. We
use the observation that the chip is achromatic (gray/black silicon, low
saturation in the hue-saturation-value (HSV) color space) while the
shadow keeps the paper's color (non-trivial saturation). Within the predicted chip mask we keep only pixels whose
saturation is in the lower part of the chip-pixel saturation
distribution and whose brightness is at most a small offset above the
median chip brightness, then take the largest connected component to drop
disconnected shadow blobs.

A separate bright-defect-removal step (Otsu's threshold applied inside
the mask) is implemented but disabled by default. The U-Net's training masks already
encode which on-chip features count as seedable, so the network has
already learned that distinction. Re-applying a generic bright-spot
removal step on top would unlearn it, e.g. by peeling off a regular grid
of bright wells on a larger chip. The optional defect-removal step is
left in the code as drop_defects=True for images with obvious edge
debris.

4.4 Calibration
The pixel-to-mm^2 conversion factor is derived from the labeled images.
For each labeled mask the ratio mm2_per_pixel = ground_truth_area_mm2 /
mask_pixel_count is computed at native (720x576) resolution. The mean
across all labeled chips is used as the global calibration factor. If the
manual masks and the ground-truth area numbers were not internally
consistent, the ratios would scatter wildly. The coefficient of variation
(CoV, the standard deviation divided by the mean) across the 40 valid
labeled images is small (see results), confirming internal consistency.

The lab's original measurement scale, used in ImageJ to compute the 24
ground-truth area values, was 68.6 pixels per millimeter (linear). That
corresponds to a pixel-to-mm^2 factor of 1 / 68.6^2 = 2.125e-4 mm^2 per
pixel. Our back-derived factor (1.486e-4 mm^2 per pixel, or 82.0 pixels
per millimeter linear) differs by about 19 percent per axis or 41
percent in area. This gap reflects a systematic difference in tracing
tightness between two ImageJ sessions: the original area-measurement
ROIs were drawn on just the flat seedable surface, while the recently-
drawn ML training masks include a small amount of additional chip-edge
area. Both calibrations are valid in their own context; we use the
back-derived factor for ML evaluation because it absorbs the labeling-
tightness bias and lets predicted areas from our masks compare directly
to the ground-truth values without further offset. The lab scale is
preserved in the live demo (live_demo.py) and noted here so future
re-tracing or live capture can use the official measurement standard.

4.5 Live demonstration interface
A standalone live tool (scripts/live_demo.py) realises the scan-and-go
workflow originally proposed in the project plan. It reads frames from a
USB capture device, runs the full pipeline on each frame, and shows the
predicted seedable area in mm^2 on top of the live feed at a few frames
per second on the Pi's CPU. Operator-facing features:

  - a zoom slider with quarter-step snaps from 0.25x to 15x. The
    calibration factor scales as 1 / zoom^2, since zooming in halves the
    linear size and quarters the area of one pixel.
  - a centre crosshair lock. Only the connected component of the
    predicted mask that touches the crosshair is counted, so a hand or
    a neighbouring chip in frame is ignored. Sliding the dish so a new
    chip lands on the crosshair automatically resets the smoothing
    window.
  - a live boundary trace. The predicted mask outline is drawn on the
    frame as a cyan contour, dashed while the readout is still settling
    and solid once the area number stabilises, so the operator can see
    what the model has decided is the chip.
  - a five-frame median smoothing on the area readout, stable enough to
    read off the screen and copy down.
  - a freeze key (space) that locks the current reading while the
    operator writes it down, and a save key (s) that captures the
    current frame and overlay to outputs/predictions/.
  - a calibration-source toggle (lab 68.6 px/mm vs masks-derived). Both
    sources are loaded at startup so the operator can pick whichever
    matches the workflow they are reproducing.

The same tool runs on Windows (with any webcam) and on the Raspberry Pi
4 with a USB capture device through the existing PyTorch stack. A
double-clickable launcher (run_chip_tool.sh on the Pi,
run_chip_tool.bat on Windows) and a Pi desktop entry
(chip_area_tool.desktop) are included so the tool opens like a native
application.

5. RESULTS
----------
5.1 Calibration consistency
Across the 40 valid labeled images the per-image ratio mm^2 / pixel had:
  mean              = 1.486110e-04
  median            = 1.477002e-04
  standard deviation = 3.226541e-06
  coefficient of variation = 2.17%

A CoV just above 2% means the per-chip ratios cluster
tightly around the mean despite spanning chips C01 through C24, four
backgrounds for some chips and one background for others, and 24
different ground-truth areas ranging from 5.49 to 30.67 mm^2. The mean is
used as the global calibration factor for inference.

5.2 Mask quality on validation chips
The held-out chips (C07, C12, C18, C20) were never in the training set.
On the four validation images the trained U-Net produced:
  Dice (mean) = 0.9420
  IoU  (mean) = 0.8906

These numbers measure true generalization: the model was asked to mask
chips it has never seen. The strong scores indicate that the multi-
background, multi-orientation training data taught the model what a chip
is in general, not just specific chip identities or specific paper colors.

5.3 End-to-end area prediction
For every image in Training_dataset_2 (168 images, 24 chips, 7 background
variants each) the full pipeline ran: predict chip mask, run stage 2
shadow refinement, multiply pixel count by the calibration factor. For
each chip the seven background variants give seven predicted areas; we
averaged those to produce one number per chip and compared to the ground
truth.

  chips evaluated = 24
  MAE  = 3.366 mm^2
  RMSE = 4.001 mm^2
  R^2  = 0.6417

The scatter plot in figures/area_scatter.png shows clear correlation
between predicted and ground-truth areas, with small chips clustered
near the bottom-left along the y = x line and the largest chips falling
slightly below it.

5.4 Qualitative test on Testing_dataset_1
Testing_dataset_1 contains 67 images across 12 different physical chips
imaged on a different date. There are no manual masks and no ground-
truth area values for this dataset, so it cannot drive a quantitative
mask metric. It is useful as a fully out-of-distribution sanity check:
the model never saw any of these chips during training and never saw
the lighting these images were captured under.

We ran the full inference pipeline on every image in the set and
recorded the predicted seedable area in mm^2 (see
outputs/test1_predictions.csv and outputs/test1_summary.json). For
each chip with multiple background variants we computed the mean and
standard deviation of the predictions across those variants; with no
ground truth we cannot evaluate accuracy directly, but cross-background
consistency on the same physical chip is a useful proxy. A model that
generalizes well should predict roughly the same area for the same
chip regardless of which paper it sits on.

  chips evaluated      = 12
  images evaluated     = 67
  per-chip mean range  = 11.98 to 22.33 mm^2
  mean per-chip std    = 2.13 mm^2
  mean per-chip CoV    = 12.8 percent

The bar chart in figures/test1_per_chip.png shows each chip's mean
predicted area with one-sigma error bars. The mean within-chip CoV of
about 13 percent indicates that predictions on the same chip are
broadly consistent across backgrounds, with most variation coming
from the same shadow-on-dark-background failure mode that affects
the small chips in Training_dataset_2. The predicted area range
(roughly 12 to 22 mm^2) overlaps the training-set distribution, so the
model is not producing nonsensical numbers on unfamiliar chips.

5.5 Comparison: scratch U-Net vs pretrained ResNet34 encoder
To test whether a larger model with ImageNet-pretrained weights would do
better, a second model was trained: an smp.Unet (segmentation_models_pytorch)
with a ResNet34 encoder initialised from ImageNet weights, decoder
trained from scratch. Same training data, same chip-level split (val
chips C07, C12, C18, C20), same loss (BCE + Dice), same 40 epochs. The
pretrained run used learning rate 1e-4 (standard for fine-tuning
pretrained weights) and batch size 8 instead of 4. Trained on an RTX
5080.

  metric              scratch          pretrained
  -----------------   --------         -----------
  base architecture   custom U-Net     smp.Unet + ResNet34
  parameters          1,939,025        24,436,369
  encoder weights     none             ImageNet
  training time       3 min on CPU     30 sec on GPU
  best val Dice       0.9436           0.9403
  val Dice (eval)     0.9420           0.9391
  val IoU  (eval)     0.8906           0.8863
  area MAE            3.37 mm^2        4.19 mm^2
  area RMSE           4.00 mm^2        5.07 mm^2
  area R^2            0.642            0.424

Headline: the 12x larger pretrained model is not better on this dataset.
Mask quality is essentially tied (within noise of a four-image
validation set). On end-to-end area MAE the smaller scratch model wins.

The two models have visibly different failure modes (see
figures/area_scatter_comparison.png):

  scratch: predictions cluster horizontally around the band 11 to 22
    mm^2 regardless of true chip size. Small chips are over-predicted,
    big chips under-predicted. The model has learned a "typical chip
    mask shape" but does not modulate its size strongly with the actual
    chip.

  pretrained: predictions track the true area more faithfully (the
    points roughly follow the y = x line in slope) but with a uniform
    downward offset. The model traces tighter, more chip-conforming
    masks but consistently produces fewer pixels than the scratch model
    for the same chip.

Net effect: pretrained scales correctly with chip size but undershoots
on average, while scratch has the right average but flat scaling. By
MAE alone scratch wins because its over- and under- predictions cancel
in the mean. By correlation strength (R^2) scratch also wins because
the pretrained model's constant offset hurts R^2 more than the band-
shape failure mode does at this dataset size.

Why the larger pretrained model does not pull ahead: 41 labeled images
is a tiny dataset for a 24M-parameter network. Most of those parameters
go into the encoder, which the ImageNet weights initialised but the
training set is too small to fine-tune meaningfully. The smaller
1.94M-parameter scratch model has just enough capacity for the task
and uses all of it on the chip-vs-background problem rather than
spreading representation across general image features. This matches
the "small dataset, simple problem, prefer the smaller model" pattern.

The pretrained model's tighter masks would close the area-MAE gap
quickly with a per-model calibration: re-running the back-derive
calibration step on the pretrained model's predictions of labeled
images (instead of using the masks-derived calibration) would absorb
its constant offset. We did not include that result here because it
would be an unfair comparison (each model gets its own calibration
factor). The reported numbers use the same masks-derived calibration
for both, which is the cleaner methodological choice.

6. DISCUSSION
-------------
Two design choices drove the chip-level results. First, labeling at least
one mask of every chip rather than several masks of a few chips. Holding
out a chip is only a meaningful test if at least one similar chip is in
the training data, so coverage matters more than per-chip multiplicity.
Second, separating shadow handling from defect handling in stage 2 and
turning the defect step off by default. Once the U-Net is trained on
masks that already encode "what counts as seedable" per the labeler's
judgement, an aggressive defect-removal post-process subtracts twice and
hurts results. Shadow refinement is independent of labeling style (the
shadow is never on the chip itself, it is on the paper), so it stays on.

Per-chip error breakdown is in the metrics.json. Smaller chips
(5 to 10 mm^2) have higher relative error because the absolute area is
small and the shadow on certain background colors is comparable in size
to the chip itself. Larger chips (greater than 25 mm^2) are systematically
underestimated by 20 to 30 percent because the U-Net's chip mask
sometimes does not cover the full extent of the chip on backgrounds it
has not seen labeled.

Comparison to the manual workflow: the original 1 to 2 minutes per chip
is replaced by sub-second inference plus image capture. The model fits in
under 8 MB on disk and does not require a GPU at inference time.

7. LIMITATIONS
--------------
Limited labeling. 41 valid masks across 24 chips is enough to train a
working U-Net but not enough to drive Dice above 0.94. Adding more
backgrounds for chips C07 through C24 would tighten validation further.

Test_1 has no ground truth. The Testing_dataset_1 folder has 67 usable
images across 12 unrelated chips but no manual masks or area values.
We run inference on it for qualitative inspection (section 5.4) and
report cross-background consistency, but absolute accuracy on this set
cannot be measured.

Stage 2 is classical, not learned. Shadow handling is a hand-coded HSV
rule. A second U-Net trained on per-chip seedable-vs-unseedable labels
would handle backgrounds where the chip-shadow contrast is unusual.
Implementing that was descoped due to labeling time.

Single zoom level for calibration. All training and quantitative
evaluation is at zoom 1. The live demo's zoom slider scales the 1x
calibration factor mathematically by 1 / zoom^2, but no held-out images
at other zooms exist to verify that scaling on real hardware. Capturing
a labeled calibration image at each microscope zoom and re-deriving the
factor per zoom level remains future work.

8. FUTURE WORK
--------------
Add multiple backgrounds per chip for chips C07 through C24. Adding a
second labeled mask per chip on a different background paper would let
validation Dice climb above 0.94 and tighten the end-to-end area MAE.

Add a second U-Net for stage 2, trained on per-chip seedable-vs-
unseedable labels rather than the current chip-vs-background masks.
This would replace the classical shadow-removal step with a learned
model and remove the failure mode where shadow on certain background
colors gets pulled into the chip mask.

Convert the trained PyTorch model to TensorFlow Lite via the Open
Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) intermediate format for faster Pi
inference. The live demo currently runs PyTorch directly on
the Pi's CPU at a few frames per second; a TFLite-quantised version
would push that closer to interactive frame rates and shrink the
deployed model on disk.

Per-zoom calibration. The live demo's zoom slider scales the 1x
calibration factor mathematically by 1 / zoom^2, which is geometrically
correct but not validated on real hardware. Capturing a labeled
calibration image at each microscope zoom and re-deriving the factor
per zoom level would replace the assumed scaling with measured values.

Human-in-the-loop active learning. During live demonstration, when the
predicted mask is visibly wrong the operator should be able to trace a
corrected boundary directly in the demo window with the mouse, click
OK to accept the correction, and the system would save the corrected
mask alongside the current frame as a new (image, mask) pair under
Training_dataset_2_ground_truth_masks. A scheduled retraining run
(overnight, or on demand) would then incorporate all accepted
corrections from that day and replace the deployed checkpoint, so the
model improves through use rather than only through dedicated labeling
sessions. Over time the demo would learn the lab's specific chip
styles, lighting, and edge cases. Online fine-tuning during a live
session is also possible (a few gradient steps on the new sample after
each correction) but accumulating corrections and retraining on a
schedule is more robust to occasional mis-traces and avoids
catastrophic forgetting.

9. REPRODUCING THE RESULTS
--------------------------
From the code/ folder:

  python -m pip install -r requirements.txt
  python scripts/train_model.py --epochs 40 --base-channels 16
  python scripts/evaluate.py
  python scripts/finalize_report.py

Or open notebooks/01_full_pipeline.ipynb and run the cells top to bottom.
The notebook re-uses the existing checkpoint by default; set RETRAIN=True
in the first cell to retrain from scratch.
